README.md, before:

# The iGEM Engineering DBTL Bootcamp

The **D**esign-**B**uild-**T**est-**L**earn (DBTL) Bootcamp is an open-source bootcamp in development by the [iGEM Engineering Committee](https://technology.igem.org/engineering-committee). 

The goal of the bootcamp is to help teams familiarize themselves with the [DBTL cycle for engineering biological systems](https://technology.igem.org/engineering/introduction). 
Specifically, it has teams designing, building, testing, and analyzing characterization data for green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter constructs of varying promoter strength.

While this is only a brief introduction to designing and building genetic circuits, and team projects are far more complex, we hope that some of the approaches and tools used in the bootcamp can be applied to any project. 

## Structure
The DBTL Bootcamp is divided into an Introduction, four "Modules" (each covering its namesake stage in the DBTL cycle), and a folder for part/plasmid files.
Each module has its own folder and introductory document. 
They may also have additional supplementary documentation, folders, assets, and files that are specific to that module.


This github repository contains documentation, assets, and files for the bootcamp, however, several external resources and tools are linked to, referenced, and/or recommended.

## Contributing
Currently, only iGEM Engineering Committee members can contribute to the DBTL Bootcamp. 

In the future, we would like to encourage external contributors to help maintain and improve this documentation! 
But for now, if you would like to contribute, please join the [iGEM Engineering Committee](https://technology.igem.org/engineering-committee).

If you would like to adapt this bootcamp, please refer to the [license](/LICENSE).

Commit message:

Added disclaimer on README.md to test Github Pages

README.md, after:

*Disclaimer: This bootcamp is designed to provide participants with valuable skills and knowledge in engineering biology. However, completion of the bootcamp does not guarantee job placement, salary increases, or career advancement. We do not offer refunds once the bootcamp has commenced. Participants are responsible for their own job search and career development efforts. While we strive to provide accurate and up-to-date information, we are not responsible for errors or omissions. The curriculum and instructors are subject to change without notice.*

# The iGEM Engineering DBTL Bootcamp

The **D**esign-**B**uild-**T**est-**L**earn (DBTL) Bootcamp is an open-source bootcamp in development by the [iGEM Engineering Committee](https://technology.igem.org/engineering-committee). 

The goal of the bootcamp is to help teams familiarize themselves with the [DBTL cycle for engineering biological systems](https://technology.igem.org/engineering/introduction). 
Specifically, it has teams designing, building, testing, and analyzing characterization data for green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter constructs of varying promoter strength.

While this is only a brief introduction to designing and building genetic circuits, and team projects are far more complex, we hope that some of the approaches and tools used in the bootcamp can be applied to any project. 

## Structure
The DBTL Bootcamp is divided into an Introduction, four "Modules" (each covering its namesake stage in the DBTL cycle), and a folder for part/plasmid files.
Each module has its own folder and introductory document. 
They may also have additional supplementary documentation, folders, assets, and files that are specific to that module.


This github repository contains documentation, assets, and files for the bootcamp, however, several external resources and tools are linked to, referenced, and/or recommended.

## Contributing
Currently, only iGEM Engineering Committee members can contribute to the DBTL Bootcamp. 

In the future, we would like to encourage external contributors to help maintain and improve this documentation! 
But for now, if you would like to contribute, please join the [iGEM Engineering Committee](https://technology.igem.org/engineering-committee).

If you would like to adapt this bootcamp, please refer to the [license](/LICENSE).
